when I was a child I was in love with
the ocean okay to be fair I was obsessed
maybe with the ocean all of the
different faces of the ocean all the
different animals that the colors the
textures the sizes they just they
absolutely fascinated me that that tiny
little biologist inside of me wanted to
talk with each and every one of them I
wanted to meet them all I wanted to ask
them where they came from where they
lived why they look the way that they do
and you know I I just I couldn't wait to
get underwater I wanted to meet
everything from the smallest most
unassuming little creatures to the the
largest fish in the sea when I finally
did actually take the plunge I was 12
and of all of the animals I met when I
was you know in those early years it was
the manta ray that left the biggest
impression on me it was absolutely
gobsmacked eing the first time I saw it
it was the most beautiful most majestic
animal I had ever seen on a land or in
the water
and and I wanted to know more I it was
love at first sight and unfortunately I
didn't know then that 15 years later I
would describe a new species of manta I
would be devoting my life to protecting
this animal but I that passion was there
just from the beginning
now mantas are cartilaginous fish like
all other sharks and rays and they
actually are the the kings of the Rays
they they get up to eight meters disc
width which is pretty big I'm sure that
you can imagine here's a photo of me
taking a genetic sample of a female in
Ecuador they dwarf you when you want to
swim next to them I have to admit but
there's there's things about them that
are more impressive than even their size
mantas are one of the only pelagic rays
in the ocean meaning they swim all of
the time they never stop they never
sleep imagine that you know we estimate
that they live between 40 and 50 years
constantly moving constantly they have
the largest brain of any fish relative
to body size a lot of people don't know
that it makes them really curious one of
the things that you notice is they they
seek out divers attention and they swim
through our bubbles they engage us with
what could only be described as play
behavior it is an awesome experience to
have an encounter with one underwater
awesome I suggested all of you guys they
are they are playing t-virus so they're
not dangerous
they feed on onso plankton is suspended
in the water column and they feed day
and night they have to feed a lot
because they feed on the smallest
organisms in the ocean now sometimes
we've seen them in large schools
hundreds of them feeding cooperatively
in these these massive chains and other
times we see mantas going at it alone
just by themselves as swimming around in
the open ocean what we do know is that
they're driven by the need to feed but I
wanted to know more and they're such an
elusive animal and I can't just go up
and speak to them they're difficult to
study so what we decided to do is look
at their distribution around the world
and put new technology on them satellite
tags on them so we pick different spots
across the globe and all three of the
world's major oceans and we started
slapping these satellite tags on them to
find out where these animals went what
they got up to and it's very expensive
technology but it it opened the doors
for us it enabled us to see where they
go what they get up to every minute of
every day is this tag captures
information about the surrounding water
that the Manchus swimming through every
10 seconds we deploy them for sometimes
4 to 6 months so we get this really
up-close and personal view of what the
mantas are doing you know where they
live you know how they feed how they
interact with one another it's actually
quite extraordinary and every single one
of these tags has delivered clues to how
we can better protect them how I can
better see that the future generations
will be able to have these encounters
like I've had with them we now know that
these animals make huge migrations you
know across the oceans they travel
thousands of kilometers in any direction
making these massive cyclical journeys
we we know that they travel up and down
continental coastlines we know that they
they cross international borders they
navigate into the high seas really
hostile conditions they're actually an
incredible ray and one of the most
interesting things is we thought we
thought they lived at the surface we
thought these were surface dwelling
animals but they're not you know one of
the coolest things we've learned about
mantas is yes they use these huge
horizontal planes in the ocean but they
are also as we found out some of the
deepest diving fish in the world they
they penetrate into the deep waters of
the ocean
up to an exceeding a kilometer from the
surface incredible stuff the more we
learn about mantas the more they
fascinate us unfortunately the more we
learn about mantas the more we realize
that they're in trouble now what are
they in trouble from us unfortunately
it's anthropogenic threats again that
bit will you know be their demise if we
don't act soon things like artisanal
fishing and in developing countries
things like directed trade fishing and
others Manta populations across the
globe are plummeting because people are
now targeting them in huge numbers
extracting out all of their body parts
to use in bogus Chinese medicinal
products yes just like our rhinos here
in Africa and as a result of some of
this heinous behavior unsustainable
behavior we've had to elevate the status
the conservation status of manta rays
both species late last year on the IUCN
Red List too vulnerable to extinction
this is an animal we may not see anymore
if we don't do something and they
deserve such a listing very conservative
life histories the females only have one
baby every two to three years and that
baby is very small and defenseless and
may not even make maturity so the
take-home message here is these are not
animals that can withstand human
predation they can't defend themselves
from us or bounce back from our
pressures so I I want to end with a
positive note which is that there is a
ray of hope you know these are
charismatic species people identify with
them divers the world over love them
they could be considered easily the
Panda of the ocean and we we have proven
that they are a lucrative drawcard for
tourism they can be used sustainably and
we really need to to to learn from from
this animal and I always say the plight
of the manta ray should be looked at as
a warning beacon to all of those people
who still want to extract every last
species of megafauna out of our oceans
we need to remember that the world would
be a far far lesser place without iconic
marine species like these so let's do
something about it